The questions that Hussle raises are incredibly deep, and I don't know that one seminar is
sufficient to expose this depth to you, but I know the readings are very difficult and I can
explain the readings, so that's a small victory. Are you threatening us with the more Hussle seminars?
Yeah, let's talk about that a little. What you have here is a selection of
short passages, which in itself makes it difficult, from five different texts. That is,
logical investigations, ideas, formal and transcendental logic, the crisis of the European
sciences, and the origin of geometry, and that's the order in which they were written from 1899
to 1936, 37 maybe. Normally, I gave them to you in the order that they were written,
because it seemed logical, and that's how I'll explain it, because they built up on it,
but actually I read them in reverse order. That is, I read the crisis and the geometry first,
because Harold told me to, and that's what he considered was most important, and they're the
most relevant and most accessible to sociologists, because they ask social questions and historical
questions. From there, I worked back to ideas and formal and transcendental logic in the middle
space, and at the very last, I did the 700-page, two-volume, tome logical investigations, working
with one of the world's top Heideggerian scholars, Frederick Golovsson, over six months in a graduate
seminar, and that's the most obscure, and so you're starting out reading the most obscure,
and you're reading short selections, so don't blame yourself if it was hard. However, Husserl did
have a very important influence on garfinkel, and it's an influence that has been underestimated
by most people who never studied with garfinkel. Originally, they just read Husserl out, because
they just didn't have an interest themselves, I think. I'm not sure why. They got that he was
interested in Wittgenstein, and he was, but he was always more interested in Husserl, and of course
they treat, they address similar issues. That denial has been transformed in recent years, judging
from what I read and the emails I get, to a kind of theory of a term. Heidegger has this term,
the early Heidegger and the late Heidegger. Well, they have developed a kind of account of garfinkel
that he was a phenomenologist, and somehow later rejected Husserl and rejected the phenomenology.
He never rejected it. He wrote, he had an article on Husserl, one of the last articles he ever wrote
in human studies. He never took phenomenology on its own terms. He only took anything on his terms,
and it's a very unique reading, and it's a very valuable reading, and it's the kind of reading
that I'm doing, and giving. But the vitality of ethnomethodology, at least the vitality of
garfinkel's project, started with his reading of Husserl. That's where he got the energy and the
interest. And that becomes very clear if you read his doctoral dissertation, which is now available
in book form in this, in this book, I think it's paradigm press edited by Anne Rawls called
Seeing Sociologically 2006. It's a fairly easy read, actually. And it's very clear that Husserl
particularly played an important role in his formative stages when he was first grappling with
how to study ordinary society. Of course, he was reading after World War II in the late 40s
and through the 50s, and there were no English translations then of Husserl. I think the first
translations of anything serious was in 62 by an Australian. And, you know, it's, he was reading
Marvin Farber, he was reading Maurice Nathanson, he was reading Aaron Gervitch, who summarized
Husserl's arguments in their English language articles. And this is what he lived and breathed
in the late 40s and early 50s. And then he started paying students when he became a professor to
translate from the German, because he didn't read German himself, although he had a good sense for
the, for the energy of the language. He had, he would hire students to translate Husserlian text
from, that were only available in English and German into English. So for people to say, oh he
wasn't, Husserl wasn't a big influence, it's complete nonsense. But, and, but you, you should be free
not to read Husserl if you don't want to. I mean some of his close students chose
not. And you, you're, everybody, you know, it's a free life. But you can't say that, that Husserl
didn't play a role. I mean you don't get to do that. I remember one of my first professors was
Peter Berger, who wrote The Social Construction of Reality. And I was telling him I love phenomenology.
And he was saying, well how, how do you know phenomenology? I said, well partly your book,
and I read a bit of Schultz and a bit of Heidegger and Marvin Farber, because that's the guy who
brought phenomenology to America. And he said, yeah, he said everybody loves Heidegger, everybody loves
reading Merleau-Plenty, there's so, all the existential stuff people like. But the real me
is Husserl's phenomenology and nobody has the patience to read that. And so, so I, I, I took
that as a challenge. Right? Okay. And I ended up reading it all. So, so I felt I satisfied
one of my first teacher's efforts to, to, to teach me. Now I could have started this series of
lectures long ago with, with Husserl, if I was going to do it logically. But I started with the
juicy stuff, you know, because I, I wanted you to enjoy phenomenology. So we read Heidegger, we read
Merleau-Plenty, and we read Manheim and Schultz. And last, we're doing Husserl. But we're going to take
the order of his writings in the, in the toughest first, I guess. But, but I'll tell you, I, I, I
think Garfunkel is a person who's very difficult to read, but each reading creates something new.
And I think Husserl's the same way. I'm still discovering stuff in him. I mean, I love, one of
the reasons I like giving seminars on him is that, especially the one I did using the Spanish texts
in Buenos Aires, you know, in Spanish, I discovered, I never noticed that before. And I go back to the
English and sure it's there all along. But I think you know well after having read through this stuff,
it's possible for your eyes to slide across the page and not, and not capture things. But when
you're reading the foreign language, you're forced to go more slowly. So it's actually a good way to,
to get a fresh look on something you've already read. So I'm, I'm, I'm obviously excited about
Husserl, one of the, one of the few, right, which, which ought to drum me out of, out of any parties.
Okay, so let's, let's start. I hope we can finish. You ought to be able to ask lots of questions,
because I think questions are good when you don't understand. But I don't think we're going to be
able to do questions and get through this. So we'll have to choose at some point to get through or,
or to ask the question. The, let's start with logic investigations. The chapter three title
is, I mean, you see the page is 312, right? So if chapter three is at 312, you know you've been
in for a while. Actually, it's the introduction, which you ought to read, which takes out most of
those pages. The chapter title is called Fluctuation in Meaning and the Ideality of Unities of
Meaning. So we're looking at fluctuation and immunities of meaning, which ought to be,
on the face of it, a fascinating topic, right? And he talks about, if you read the first sentence
in our last chapter, we dealt with the act of meaning. Just to see meaning as an act is something
that, that is turning philosophy into a social science, because an act is something people do.
And that's what phenomenology looks at, is acts. Later in the paragraph, he talks about the shifting
acts of meanings. It's this flux of relations. How do these meanings shift? He can't talk about this
without looking at social phenomena, without looking at communication, because that's why
the meaning is shifting. It isn't shifting all by itself. I mean, I suppose you could have a study
of somebody whose meaning, understanding changes as they read through, but he is looking at social
things and understand he spent much of his life thinking about these issues in, in conjunction
with, with a fellow German-Jewish scholar and Garrick Simmel. And they corresponded and he
read his books, his Simmel's books. And I think you see the dialogue. A lot of this stuff, I think,
originates with some of Simmel's madness. At least there, there's the influence there.
So this, on, on, on the bottom of that paragraph, where he says five lines up, expressions whose
meaning shifts. It's just, this is a fascinating topic. It's, I wanted to teach my students this,
and I'm not going to teach students by reading Hustl, at least not sociology students who are
graduates and in some cases undergraduates. Actually, in this case, it was undergraduates,
because I decided I was going to teach them about expressions whose meaning shifts by having them
go out and study coffee tasting. And they went out and filmed people tasting coffee and looked at how
those descriptors changed their meaning over the course of the cup. Some of them were professionals
and some of them were, were lay consumers. And it was such a great topic, it became a major
research topic for me. It's great fun. I mean, there's nothing more fun in the world than
studying the shifting of sense. I mean, it really, it really, it makes you less absolute in your
personality and character. I mean, it makes you dance to the ironies of life. And so, so,
so he's got a good handhold. And the question then is, how do these shifting meanings become
communities of me? How do, how do we tame this, this amorphous beast so that we can get on with
things? And, and that's what he's studying. And that involves social work. When people create what
he calls objectivated forms, he says in the next section, 25, that there can be two kinds.
There can be kinds that have some intimations. Those in the third line of section 25 on 312.
Those that also intimate what they name. Intimate, he defines in the last section,
in the last sentence of this section, if we limit on 313. If we limit intimation in the
narrower sense to experiences which carry an expression's meaning. So, so there are some
expressions that you know what just what they mean. It's, it's sort of clear. But then there are also
those. He says, quote, in whose case named and intimated contents follow us under, that they,
they don't nobody knows what they mean. They don't even might not even know themselves what they mean.
And it's, it's, it's like an empty pallet or an empty shell that the name is there. There's an
objectivation. There's an expression. People are focusing on the expression. But it's like an empty
pallet. It still remains to determine its content. And so it's, it's, it's, you know, inherently a,
a social phenomenon because it presents local parties, we would call them members,
with the task of turning those objectivated forms into something that people can understand together
and can work with. And so that's a practical task that people face. And that's what Garfinkel
was up to all his life. There's no earlier, later. If you look on, on section 26,
he speaks of essentially occasional and objective expressions.
And he speaks in the middle of 314. Right after the question mark just above the middle on 314,
can we there still stick to self identical meaning unities? So meaning unities has to do with how
do we, how do we make these, these meanings unified? How do we produce unified meanings
so that, so that it's clear what they mean and so that everybody's clear about what they mean?
That's what, what he means by objective. And, and of course, because he's doing phenomenology,
the how of that is much more interesting to him than the what.
It, the self identity, self identical means it, it keeps the meaning as,
as the event develops and even the next day, you have a meaning unity that remains the same,
but it doesn't remain the same all by itself. It remains the same because of the work
that the parties are doing to sustain that unity of sense. So we're interested in just how
that those members produce that unity of sense as a major task. It might be the
social activity synchrono. He speaks on 314 just below the middle. He's got two italicized
phrases. The first is, and I've written it up here, essentially subjective and occasional expressions.
And he defines that at the top of 315. He says, on the other hand, we call an expression essentially
subjective and occasional or more briefly, essentially occasional, if it belongs to a
conceptually unified group of possible meaning. In whose case, it is essential to orient actual
meaning to the occasion, the speaker and the situation. That's basically indexicality, right?
It's, it's, it's, it's meanings the way they happen in the real world. They have an indexical
character to them. But then he talks about objective expressions, the second term in italics.
And he defines that on 314 in that next paragraph. We shall call an expression objective if it
pins down, or can pin down, its meaning merely by its manifest auditory pattern, and can be
understood without necessarily directing one's attention to the person uttering it, or to the
circumstances of the utterance. This is basically a definition of objective. But you, you feel
Husserl's struggling in providing us with a definition of objective, because it's a very
tough thing. And that's what's kept me doing my coffee research. Everybody uses the term objective,
and everybody has a different idea. The way the term is used in society and in science varies
dramatically. What is objective? That's a radical question. It's an ethnomethodological question,
because it's what people are doing. And it's, it's, I mean, does what Husserl provides us here,
if it, if it pins down its meaning merely by its manifest auditory pattern, and can be understood
without necessarily directing one's attention to the person uttering it, does that exhaust the
meaning of objectivity? What more can there be? Objectivities don't happen on their own,
they involve practical work. And in an ethnomethodological way, I don't want to resolve,
I don't want us to, to solve the problem, answer the question, what more can objective mean,
by theorizing. I want to go out and watch people do it. And so Garfinkel did that. And
toward the end of his teaching, he came up with this, this model of interaction in which
the local work of accounting was, in fact, the practical work of people trying to continuously
upgrade these subjective and occasional expressions with objective expressions.
And, and you'll read in his writings, how, how they're always trying to get this substitution,
that, that is to substitute the objective expression for the occasional expression,
because it helps them organize the orderliness of their local affairs.
Now, Garfinkel also was very suspicious of that, and in suspicion, he, he,
I would say, cultivated during his reading of whistle's crisis, because that's the crisis of the
European sciences. In their concern with objectivity, they forgot to see. That is, they forgot that
there were these earlier moments of originality in which things were still in play, and that they,
in fact, substituted those occasional expressions for objective expressions. So they lost the
phenomenon. And so we, we are ever critical of objectivist, positivist strategies for losing
the phenomenon. But, I think we can go too far with that criticism, because you need some degree
of objectivation just to function. And I'm observing, witnessing, by going to the real world and
looking at coffee tasters doing objective work, I'm realizing that the objectivities that they
produce actually help them inquire into the flavors of coffee, that they'd be lost without
those objectivities. But that doesn't mean that, that they can just settle for the objectivities
and turn their minds off. They have to constantly realize that their, that those objectivities
are social productions. Because those objectivities, those reductions, those formulations, those
accounts will never exhaust the, the potential sense there is in worldly investigations, whether
you're a geologist or a coffee taster. So if you're going to be original and discover, as I've said
many times, what you need to know most, which is what it is you don't know, then you're going to
need to be open. And that openness comes from doing the phenomenological bracketing. That is,
understanding that these are production practices, that we are producing these objectivities and to
understand the nature of their reality. And we'll talk about that in a second when we move to ideas.
So this practical work consists of substituting the objective expressions for occasional
expressions and its work that's never finished. The world being what it is. And so a lot of
maintenance is required. And so ethomethodologists study this maintenance. This maintenance implies
that, as he says, at the end of that large paragraph at the top, first half of page 314,
that ends with a sentence. Obviously, we are here dealing with a case of unavoidable,
rather than chance ambiguity, no kidding, one that cannot be removed from our language,
one that cannot be removed from our life, he means to say, by an artificial device or convention.
That is, the indeterminacy is the nature. And of course, Merleau-Ponty picked up on this big time,
right? He wrote a lot about indeterminacy, which we, as members of the Enlightenment,
Euro-Americans, civilized people, want to limit the indeterminacies because we want
to be certain about everything. And we need certainty in order to believe our own propaganda.
And it's a lot easier to proceed in our affairs when we believe our own propaganda. But these
indeterminacies are very difficult, obviously, who so informs us. So I would say, as an aside,
there are two kinds of people, some people who get disturbed at these indeterminacies,
when the organized meaning falls apart, and those who get delighted by it,
when it falls apart. We're the second kind. If you're disturbed when the meaning falls apart,
and there's some researchers in our EMCA field who do get disturbed by that, although most don't,
but there's some to do, then probably you should find some other meaningful academic or
non-academic employment, right? You might become an accountant or something. Of course,
do they probably know better the indeterminacies? Well, look at your text book, Indeterminacies.
What's that? Look at your text book, Indeterminacies. I mean,
there are a lot of indeterminacies even in the context. Oh, yeah, exactly. Yeah, the text is that.
Actually, there's probably a third kind. Okay, so there's people who get disturbed by
indeterminacies, people who celebrate and dance, everyone they discover. And I urge you to be that
kind. But there's also a third kind, which is people either capitalists or politicians who seek
to profit by each situation that comes apart. I imagine people like Napoleon were brilliant at
that. But anyway, we're gonna have time for jokes. So, he says again at the bottom, six lines from
the bottom of 314, that objectivity depends on the tenor of the talk already in progress.
And the tendencies, it arouses. The tendencies talk arouses. My goodness, that seems social
studying talk. Way back in 1899. I mean, that's really remarkable. Anyway, in these situations,
we're very interested in learning just how expressions become objective. And across the page
in the last phrase of that first paragraph on 315, he speaks about these expressions sometimes
as having generally graspable, sufficiently reliable clues to guide the here to the meaning
intended in the case in question. Okay? I mean, he's, you know, understand that he and Simmel
didn't have tape recorders. That's the best that they could write. If you're gonna study talk,
you know, sufficiently reliable clues to guide the here, right? But if he had transcripts and he
had the tools that we had, I mean, I think he would have probably even done more work in this.
Anyway, we're doing the work. So we ought to be happy. But it's not like Huschel's way over there,
disconnected, in my view. Okay. And the next section, that's section 38.
He's speaking about objectifying acts and noema. And don't be confused by noema. Noasis
is the live thinking of your mind. Noema are products of that thinking, the transitory shifting
objectivation of those thinking. That is in this diagram that I put up. If we're, if we're thinking,
and I mean, a, a positive would say, okay, we just, we just see the facts and we're just
representing what we see. But a phenomenologist realizes that in fact, we are projecting
the sense on the object. We're seeing something in the light of our interests. So we're formulating
it. And this, this, this, it's not strictly conceptual, but this is the noema. The, the,
the framework through which our thinking passes that helps us, like coffee descriptors, to coordinate
our deeper and ever deepening understanding of the object that we're investigating.
So noema is, is, is this, it's like, it's like an account. It's like a term or it can be something
less than that. He says that the function of objectivated noema is to hold and preserve
or to present, that's a term he gets from Bentano, who was his teacher, right?
To present formulated thoughts. And on page 130, on page 639, right, we're, we're moving a lot
quickly in this. He speaks of the widest concept that the term presentation can stand for. And he
names this objectivating acts. And this term presentation is given a recent reflection by,
by Gunter Fegall, who is professor of philosophy at Freiburg in his recent book, Objectivity.
And you might want to have a look at his chapter on presentation.
He speaks about single-rate acts in, in this section and many-rate acts. And single-rate acts
are, are things, when I just see one, one item like a chair, but let's say, you know, I've got,
I've got a dozen different things I have to pack in my car. Some squares, some round, some long,
some with, with, with legs that don't unscrew off. And it's a many-rate act that I'm engaging in.
And in terms of ideas, we have lots of dimensions of ideas. The taste of coffee has many dimensions,
and I'm moving in many directions at once, but I'll capture it all under a general term,
like oily seeds or something, or roundness. And there's a tendency then, just for the purpose
of being able to function, for us to turn those many-rate acts into unities, into, into, first
unities retaining the many-rays, but ideally with a single-rate, because the many-rate unities are
very unstable and are difficult to work with interactionally. And so these are turned into
what he calls monothetic acts. In fact, many-rate acts are synthesized and objectivated to help
a, a local cooperative group function successfully. If you look on the bottom of 639,
it is true, but it is true. That's four lines from the bottom on page 369 of investigation,
five of logical investigations. It is true of the conjunctive or better collective synthesis,
as it is true of the predictive synthesis, that it permits a nominalization, in which case the
collective object constituted by the synthesis becomes the simply presented object of a new
single-rate act, and so is made objective in the present sense of the word. So you get all this
work and social work to condense the indexical meanings in a single term that maybe, maybe the
coffee tasters are using. It might still be somewhat indeterminate, but it carries enough
of these many-rate senses that the single term can be used in writing it down on a form
so that it can be passed on to the roaster, so the roaster knows what flavor he's aiming at,
or to the buyer, so he knows what kind of beans to buy. But the question is, and we're going to
see this when we get to the passages in the crisis that Whistle offers us, the does, the
objective form gets passed to the roaster, but does the meanings, do the meanings get passed?
This is the problem of every religion, right? You have these great guys with long beards
having these wonderful insights, and they develop these liturgies and write these books,
Bibles even, commentaries that get transmitted. I mean, we just had Passover last week. I mean,
you have a whole written procedure. You say this, you eat this, you say that, you eat that,
you're supposed to remember slavery, and it's just a social occasion. It's so shallow. It's
embarrassing. Most Passover, most Seder dinners I go to, I'm embarrassed for my own people,
because it's so superficial, because it's such a profound radical revolutionary political experience
in its origin. So how do you get back to that original sense? How do you re-vivify with Durkheim's
term, the form that gets passed down? So we're committed to this. We don't live forever. So we
have to institutionalize our ideas, and we have to simplify the ideas or they won't successfully get
passed down. So we turn these many rays into single rays. We turn these several accounts
into a single summary account, and you go on any tape that you make, and you'll hear the accounts,
and you'll hear a gradually economizing account, so that one terms will stand for everything that
people have thought through and experienced while they're tasting the coffee or whatever they're
doing. And how does that term retain that sense? That's the question that Hussal asked in reference
to geometry in the crisis and in the origin of geometry, and we'll come to that after the break.
So okay, so I mean it's difficult stuff, but it's real stuff. It's real stuff because we're
studying accounts. We're studying how people do that coordination of meaning. But of course,
do itself is a problematic word. Do is a relic of the Enlightenment. It's a relic of the great
age of the rationalist Cartesian subject who's in charge of everything. We're clueless most of the
time. There's no such animal as that. So we're not doing things as things are being done to us. We're
in the midst of these activities, the flux of what some are called reciprocal stimulations
of meanings, or just moving, and we're finding a way to work with them as they're passing us by.
We're not like master builders the way it's easy to write provided you don't have to leave your
study. If you go out and study and find people in the real world, you realize, oh my god,
here's a collection of 35 of the world's best whatever nuclear scientists, astronomers,
and they're not sure what they're doing either, right? I mean it's amazing. So we talk about
doing and we talk about production practices, but there needs to be as much passivity as activity.
And Herschel came to realize this too, but those books have only just been translated
in a new volume, or now not so new, about 10 years ago. Anthony Steinbach translated Herschel's
text on passive synthesis, which I think, I mean Herschel lived 100 years ago without video
recorders. So it's pretty amazing when you come up. Okay, let's move on to ideas.
Ideas is probably a decent place to start. It's a good book to carry with you. If you get a paper
back, it's like one of these books that you don't need to bring many other books. So it's
light to travel with. It's good for backpacking. If you look on 113, this is in section 50
of ideas, the fourth line on page 113, just there's a reference to the German text 94 at the top
right of that page. It should be the next page right after the logical investigations.
Yes.
Well, I'll go and read it. Yes.
Reality is not in itself something absolute, which becomes tied secondarily to something else.
Rather than the absolute sense, it is nothing at all.
It has no absolute essence, whatever. It has the essentiality of something which of necessity
is only intentional. My intention was Brent Thomas term, Brent Thomas being Herschel's teacher.
Only an object of consciousness, something presented in the manner peculiar to consciousness,
something apparent as apparent. So this is a very radical statement. Reality basically
is not what we think it is. If we think that reality is this object after we've erased all of that,
standing in itself, then that doesn't exist. There are trees, but there are trees that are part
of a process in which I am intending, this line is the line of intentionality,
that I persist. In another way of saying that there are no facts, they're only interpretations.
Or all facts are interpreted, that might be another way of saying it.
Why does reality lack self-sufficiency in terms of its essence? Because
its being depends on our understanding. Its essentiality is only intentional,
which means it is only an object of consciousness, like society. Who would argue society exists?
It's not there. It's an ideal notion, or your identity. Who am I? I'm a candlestick maker.
I'm an Indian chief. All these are constructions that don't really exist.
That doesn't mean they have no function. They have a kind of existence.
Now, he refers in 113 to living naively and experiences like really believing
in the independent reality. Like, I really am a movie star. I'm hot, can't you tell?
And so you have Judy Garland committing suicide, because it turns out she was not so hot.
As when her fault, the world led her to believe she was that hot. She was too young
to work it out. It happens to a lot of childhood actors.
So if you realize this lack of independent, that this reality is not the truth of our being,
there'll be some measure of safety, maybe. But you still need to use these things.
I mean, there's a sense in which this coffee does have a round flavor, or have woody flavor.
But the woodyness is your invention. It's not the coffee itself. And so you need to
proceed. You need to learn how to proceed with those objectivated notions that help you understand
the coffee better, but you can't be limited by your use of those objectivated notions.
So how do you use those notions? How do you use those objectivities?
In a wise way would be a way I would say. And so he develops a phenomenological reduction,
this practice of putting out of action our positings. And if you look on 114,
in the middle of the page, after the IE, just above the 95,
reference to the German edition, page 114 of the English,
we parenthesize the positings affected. For our new inquiries, we do not participate in these
positings. Instead of living in them, instead of affecting them, we affect acts of reflection
directed to them. So instead of living in them, instead of taking them seriously,
instead of believing your propaganda, you look at how they got to be what they were. And that
will open you up to the whole historicality of how they got to be made. And it will open you up,
hopefully you can go back far enough to find how they got to be made and get the horizon of
original experience that you had at that moment. It's like if you're following a map and you get
lost and the map, the unity of sense of the map falls asunder because it doesn't, the place you
found doesn't correspond with how you interpreted the dots on the map. You go back to the
point where you were really sure, where you really had the map in hand, and then you start out again,
because you can't just capture the meaning of the map at that point. You need to capture the
horizon of meaning, this futural anticipation of what's coming next. You have to go back and capture
it at a point where you knew where it was. So it's kind of like archaeology, I suppose,
archaeology of consciousness. I think Foucault already did that, but anyway. So by positing,
he's merely talking about this arrow. But what we're talking about here is there's an arrow in
which, it's really the arrows going in both directions. You have the landscape is transformed
by the way we posit it, and that landscape feeds back to us and gives us a new perspective from
which to posit further. So there's a circular, I suppose, process of understanding. In any case,
what's interesting for us is not just how this happens with one person, but how people together
do this. But in both cases, we keep our minds trained on what he's calling here a sense bestowing
consciousness. And so the first definition of phenomenology would be the study of
sense bestowing consciousness, or he says in the last line of this section 50 in the middle of the
page on page 114, the infinite field of absolute mental processes, the fundamental field of
phenomenology. Now that fundamental field of phenomenology is italics. It makes you even more
determined to figure out what on earth is he talking about by infinite and absolute. I mean,
it's not apparent. Absolute here simply means strictly. It's like just looking at the thinking
part by itself. Sometimes he uses the word pure. Just looking at what is the mind doing,
regardless of what's really out there. I mean, even if you're hallucinating,
is there an hallucination? Let's capture if it's really happening in your mind, then it's real enough
for us to capture. So that's the absolute mental processes and infinite because there's so much
we don't have enough paper to write the field notes for all of that the people are doing. So we
have to be selective. And of course, Garfield's advice is select those aspects that are most
identifying of the work they're doing. Anyway, the second definition of phenomenology is it's the
study of the imminent structures of consciousness, right? That is the stuff that's going on.
Imminent means really close up. There's two words in English. I don't know how it comes out in
Danish, but imminent and imminent, imminent is spatial and imminent is temporal. And we're talking
about the spatial. Heidegger's phrase was proximally and for the most part. That means
proximally means really in your face. Okay, let's move on to 55.
And he says in the second line in italics, all real unities are unities of sense.
That is, society isn't real. My identity isn't real. Well, it is real, but that
real unity is a unity of sense. That is, it's related to the sense bestowing consciousness.
He says, you see on line two and three of 129, the phrase sense bestowing consciousness. And then
a few lines down in the italics again, he says in absolute line eight, maybe nine,
an absolute reality is just as valid as around square. Reality and world are names here precisely
for certain valid unities of sense. And he doesn't hear mean any subjectivism. These things are
really happening. You really do think these things. So there's no subjectivism involved.
There's no real idealism involved. In Garfinkel's book, the seeing sociologically that was based on
his dissertation, he talks about the sterilities of subjectivism. He was very clear at the outset,
he's not into subjectivism, which is why he got a little upset when everybody first reviewed
ethnomathology as being subjectivist, because he was opposed to that from the get go.
That is, the phenomenological reduction excludes the naive natural attitude that believes its own
propaganda. So it's just rejecting the bullshit. I mean, it's not like that qualifies one for
being objective, just because you don't believe all the positive is propaganda doesn't make you
a subjectivist. That is, if facts are really interpreted facts, then thinking that their
facts all by themselves is to be biased. Even though it sounds like bias belongs with that
word interpretation, but the interpretation is really going on, then that's not subjective.
It's not idealism. Excluding the natural attitude means that we do not dream the
objectivations are severed from consciousness, or from the imminent, if we're going to talk more
like ethnomathologists, those objectivations, those accounts, those formulations, those organizing
ideas are never separated from the imminent, interactional processes that generate those local
structures. Okay, so let's go on to 87. The, uh, yeah, it's a couple pages later. Oh, it's page
211, but since it's, it says chapter three, now why, this is another, this is ideas, chapter three.
He talks here about, he's critical of one may have, it's towards seven lines, eight lines on the
bottom, one may of course use the word phenomenology, but one does not have the matter itself. He's
already upset midway in his career that people are saying phenomenology, this and phenomenology,
that, and don't have a clue what it is. Just as Harold was really upset about people talking about
ethnomathology, this and ethnomathology, that, and he wanted to stop using the word. He didn't
want to talk about it, the methodology, he wanted to engage in actual studies instead of talking
about engaging in actual studies. Uh, so the rigor is necessary, uh, if you don't have phenomenology
unless, unless you get to a kind of very austere analysis in which you're tough nose about not
accepting anything theoretical. He's not trying to be theoretical. It's more like the, the observations
of bird watchers. You know, he's, he's just not watching birds building nests. He's watching
human beings thinking. Uh, he says on the next page to 12, um, I'm not sure where, but, but he,
he talks about it, uh, unin, people, unencumbered, I mean, he talked about himself, unencumbered by
all current and learned theories, sort of satirizing, learned theories. We don't want a, a theory, uh,
um, he, you know, he says about, I don't know, a third the way up from the bottom. Rather than
living in the perception, adverted to the perceived and considering and theorizing,
they do not matter to direct the regard instead to the perceiving. That is, he wants,
he wants to not be distracted. He finds theorizing a distraction. So there's even, I would say,
a fraternity here with the ideological aspects of those phenomenologists
who tell me at any rate that they don't read Husserl because they think theory is a distraction
and Husserl is a theorist, so they don't read Husserl. And if they were to read Husserl, they
would get the advice from them that they shouldn't be theorizing things. Okay. Uh, and I think it's,
it sounded vice. And it doesn't mean that we can't over theorize with phenomenology. We just have to
be really disciplined and not do it. That's where the rigor is. Um, in, in the next section 102,
uh, it also covers objectivation. It discusses the nomadic object that is the object that functions
as a sign, a designation, a unity in the mental process. You see objectivation in italics on
249 and Garfinkel picks up that term, uh, and uses it from 1950 onwards. Um,
the, uh, it's this objectivation that is a nomadic core in Husserl's language that's, that's,
it's used by people to coordinate their thinking, to hold, remember I said, to preserve and present
the object that they found using that way of looking at it, to preserve it so that they
continue to experience it in that way. That nomadic core allows that not only allows us to
have that experience, but it allows us to share that experience, provided that we give a name to
it and indicate what's something about what's to be done with that name. So it's what allows a group
to proceed as a collective body. Okay. There's a very interesting passage in, in section 121,
uh, which is a couple of pages later, um,
that reveals that Husserl had an active scope, uh, of social phenomena, uh, in sight. Um, and I,
I'll read the passage to you on page 289, uh, under section 121. Um, and then we'll talk about
that's line five on 289. For example, the mother who looks lovingly upon her flock of children
embraces each child singly and altogether in one act of love. The unity of the collective
act of loving is not a loving and in addition, the collective objectivating, even if it is
attached to the loving as it's necessary foundation, loving instead is itself collective.
Now that's a very curious passage because it's an incredibly social kind of analysis.
It's one of those relatively few occasions in which Husserl specifically is examining a
collective activity rather than an activity of individual consciousness. And, and it shows that,
that, that he, it's not that he's completely ignorant of the social, uh, although given the
prejudice of his time, he always goes back to the classical philosophical Cartesian
individual consciousness, uh, which I think is a flaw, but, but he's fully aware. And I think to
some extent, uh, that motivated his interest in simile and simile taught him even more, uh, about
this interest, um, that this idea of collective objectivating, which I think I put up here,
is, uh, is, I think, I think the story, it's not, he finds this interesting, uh,
it's not something added on, it's like something foundational. So that's interesting. But
it's not foundational enough so that when Husserl, or when Husserlian philosophers
start doing their, their, uh, their formal phenomenological analyses that they provide
such an originary reading of the collective, uh, objectivation when they, when they analyze,
I mean, they basically reduce everything to the individual. I've had these arguments for years
in the phenomenology meetings, uh, that, that is its collective character is primordial.
People don't know what they're doing ahead of time and then negotiate meetings like,
like the social contract. That's mythology. Garfinkel would say that's a just so story.
Doesn't happen that way. They, people, and Heinegger already understands it and that's,
that's why Garfinkel read Heinegger. That's what got him excited because this phrase you get in
Heinegger, it's always already known. That always already implies that, that people don't start with
entabular rasa and then add it up due to some kind of phenomenological process of synthesizing
meanings and get to a deductive conclusion. Rather, Heinegger's talking about the always already
rethrown into the world, not of our own making with the solution in our hands and only at that
point do we start to make sense of what it is I've got. And that's, at that point, that's when
Garfinkel wants to be there. How does that sense making happen? How do we, how, what are those
achieve coherences? Right? I mean, it's, it's incredibly radical and, you know, uh, I remember
as a hobby saying, no, it's arguing with him about, about the originality of collectivity and no,
all that's in hustle. All you got to read more carefully. You got to read more carefully. And
he's right. But, but there's even more, I think, it's even more important than I think he appreciates.
Anyway, then he talks in this page, he goes on to talk about an emotional objectivity. Okay,
once you, once you start talking about an emotional objectivity, I can tell you all the
scientists in my university are going to check out, right? They punch their exit card on, on
emotional objectivity, right? But there are these, like, let's say there's a Bruce Springsteen song,
or just every Bruce Springsteen concert, for being sake, is an emotional objectivation, right?
I mean, wow. And it's a different experience because of its collective character. And if you
don't know anything about Bruce Springsteen and you come into it that way, it's only a collective
phenomenon and not an individual one. Uh, I mean, and you can hear really well that way. And so it,
if it's really going on, it's not subjectivist, it is objective. But then the question is,
and now we want to ask this question in the most radical way possible, how is it objective?
That is, how can this example shed light upon what it is to be objective?
It's, how does this emotion that gets objectivated as an object in the way of everyone to share
and to use for harmonizing their actions? It's, he speaks of the unity of a collective liking.
I mean, there's a lot going on. It's, I don't know anyone who's really commented much on this
passage. It's sort of buried deep in ideas. And, and not, he, I don't think he comes back to it.
My problem is, I don't read German. And there's more stuff that's in Husso's library in Belgium
than, than there is, this has been translated, right? I mean, so I can't really be a bonafide
Husso and scholar, but I don't read German, right? So everybody said, why haven't you read German?
I had my hands full, you know? I mean, anyway, and I don't have enough years to do that. But who knows?
Okay, move on to my favorite book, Formal and Transcendental Logic, and then we'll take a break
after, after we do this. Isn't it? Oh yeah, that's number two. That is, well, 16 and 17,
what, 116 and 170? That's just number two readings. We send it in two packages. Oh, did we? Okay.
Subsection F, the Categorial Formations. Every time I type Categorial,
Microsoft Word wants to do a spell check. They'll change it for me,
no. I mean, I like to turn everything they do off.
Habitual and intersubjective possessions, okay. Okay, here again, in this passage,
and I select it for that reason, from Formal Transcendental Logic, I should add,
I think it's Herschel's best book because more than any other book, he wrote it from beginning
to end as one coherent piece. All logical investigations, ideas are kind of like,
like Viconstinian notebooks, right, with, with topics that have organization for a large
range of pages, but the whole book isn't one particular piece. The, in fact, a lot of his work
now are his unpublished works. And then you never know how much the editor's doing, you know,
whether the editor's long grab, or many others. But here, this was his piece, and I think it's
a good one to read if you want to get into the real or so. Anyway, here in this passage, he talks
about a community of judges again, and judges in the plural, and of Categorial Objectivities
as constituted in the judgment community. So that's certainly a social phenomenon. We can talk about
a lot of things, but in the interest of time, I'm just going to stick with the most relevant.
And I find those in G, the objectivity given beforehand,
he identifies two kinds of objectivity here. He identifies the objectivity given beforehand,
and he contrasts that with the Categorial Objectivity produced by thinking.
So the category, the objectivity beforehand is like received ideas, like,
I don't know, I suppose, a prayer book for a particular ceremony, or a prayer,
or something that's handed down that everybody knows something about, and it's given beforehand.
But then there are those things that you yourself produce. He says the one given beforehand is the
pooled experience of a community that is on line six. And there's some very interesting
things about this discussion, but the social aspect should be clear. The sense of what's
handed down is really only evident when it's embodied in actual affairs, and he calls that
meaning fulfillment, or sense fulfillment, that you get this thing that's handed down,
and then this objectivity handed down, and then you get, you have to, well,
Durkheim's term was vivify, but they were writing at the same time, I suppose they read each other,
but he's talking about the, you have to make it come alive again in this sense fulfillment.
But, I mean, even though there's this division between these long-standing, maybe,
you know, they can be a thousand years, two thousand years, objectivities that get passed down
from generation, from one congregation to the next, but you still, they're still
categorically formed. I mean, categorical objectivity is categorical, obviously, because you're
making it and you're synthesizing a sense for it, but the, my mind's going 12 places,
they're both involved, categorical formations. There's no way that you can, there's no objectivity
that stands on its own. You always have to develop its horizon of sense and application,
but there is a distinction in terms of the pedigree of an objectivity and something
that's brand new. There are, like in the coffee business, there are forms that people use,
and there are respected forms that have been used for decades in thousands of international
top prize coffee tasting, and that has, you respect that form, or there are forms that you develop
just because you're not happy with that form for the, for the coffees that you have to,
maybe you're in Italy and the form's based on infusion, and you're doing espressos,
and you need a different form. The form that I saw at BKI coffee in Arroz two days ago,
it's a really fascinating form because it's briefer than most forms, and it's less
quantitative, though there are some quantitative indications on it, but they would be lost
without that form. They, they would be really, it allows them to make sure they remember to
look at all these aspects of the flavor, and, and it's oriented toward their practical needs
of finding defects and, and of making sure that the coffees they're buying are good enough for
the blends that they're, their intent on making, and, but then they can fill in the form, and they
then pass on the form to other people, and then they have to understand what that form means.
So what, the question again is what is objectivity? If you, you give it a number, the Italians are
very precise, it's an 80.5 just above the level you need to be certified, right? So it's objective,
right? But, you know, bless their souls, they know that, that it's not that objective, it's very
objective, but what is objective? And there's some odd things going on in that, you know, the coffee
was roasted a week ago, two weeks ago, so it's not going to have the flavor, if I'm going to judge it
fairly, maybe if it only gets a 79.5, it should qualify, you know. You have to use some wisdom
and, and judgment. Anyway, what I'm saying is that, is that the, the category of operations,
the, the need to resituate each form, I mean, I'm trying to get at what is objectivity.
Hustl's question is how do we make our experiencing itself and its productions a theme of judgment?
You're looking, you're not taking it for granted, you're not accepting the propaganda, oh it's 80.5,
it's on the best form by the best teachers, it's fact. You're looking at the process of judgment,
you're looking at the synthetic activities, the category of activities of a judgment community.
Now, Hustl uses a very important research strategy, and he talks about this on 119.
He says, on the, on the very top of 119, if we go on synthetically to make our experiencing itself
and its productions a theme of judgment, only then can we have original knowledge of the fact
that this harmoniously flowing experiencing already bears implicitly in itself before our thinking,
before our thinking, and the category of formations produced by our thinking, the
being sense of nature, as the same sense that thinking explicates, and he says,
all this too is anything but a piece of argumentative idealism. He doesn't want just
theory, it is obtained not from any speculating epistemology, right, he gets accused of being
epistemologist, or standpoint philosophy, that's static philosophy, that's the philosophy of
positivists, but from plain sense investigation and discovery. I mean, can you see how
this statement here is sympathetic with the motivating statement of ethnomethodology,
not standpoint philosophy, but plain sense investigation and discovery. So he wants to
go to the things themselves, and there's remarkable continuity between ideas and formal and transcendental
logic. So our studies are studies of sense investigation, but our studies also many times
have been too conceptual. And we need to pay, we need to learn how to pay more attention to the
eight conceptual phenomena by which the world gains its coherency. I know that's a theoretical
observation, but how do I not reduce everything, all coherencies, to the conceptual? I mean,
we need to find research domains which are tough to turn into concepts. And it's hard to study
that because these eight conceptual coherencies are invisible. I mean, it's hard to know, I'm
studying these surfers, and you know, I can't know for sure, three times out of four, and I'm a surfer,
and they're all taken for granted, right? I mean, Garfinkle says that in many places.
And so they kind of like slip in under one's gaze as a sort of of course phenomenon. So to turn
those into perspicuous cases is the task. And that's why, you know, Garfinkle went to the inverting
lenses and the pedestrian crossings and the freeway traffic, things like that. So here's another
definition for ethnomethology. We're studying the taken for granted coherencies that provide the
foundation of ordinary sense. The taken for granted, you know, these Gestalt coherencies
to use Barrett's face. Okay, should we, yeah, let's just finish the pharmacotranscendental
logic and then we'll come back and do the crisis. On the next section on 125, I think that's Greek
C, that looks like a Y, the scientist attitude. We have more discussion of
categorical objectivities, and they don't exist before our thinking. And yet, as soon as we think
them, they seem to be existing by themselves just as soon as we come up with them. I mean,
just as soon as gets a hope, we would say just as soon as they clean up the data and they find the
star, the star is all there by itself, right? It's no longer dependent on the data. I mean,
it just happens instantly. So in what sense, if Husserl is right, if Husserl
is correct about them being always categorically formed, always synthesized, then in what sense
can they be objective? Can they be objective? What do we mean by objective if they are partly
our production? Well, to some sense, there's a tangibility to that objective. A tangibility
as an object, as in taste descriptors, you know, have a tangibility to them. The Noema,
what allows them to retain the idea is that they have this objectivity to them. They have this
tangibility to them. The intention aimed at cognition passes clear through these Noema. He
tells us on 125. You can't think without them. And they're even more important in social affairs.
They're not just important for our own thinking the way classical phenomenology would think it,
but they're important in social affairs. And in fact, but there's an added problem. Once a
categorical objectivity is given a name and that nominal form is appreciated and confirmed by
everybody, it all of a sudden gains a moral value. And that moral value tweaks everything.
And really, it's hard to see clearly after the expectation that this is the truth
starts being laid upon us. But that's a separate topic. He actually does talk a little about that,
but we're not going. But he says on this page, these conditional acquisitions are abiding
and accessible to everyone. Okay, that's the important thing. And he says every scientific
statement has this sense from the start. It's already addressed to this everyone.
So this is social and expresses Herschel's interest in communication as well.
I think Herschel is implying that the process of constructing these ideal objectivities
is the same for the scientist as it is for the everyday judge, as he calls it. But that leads
us to the question is, so what then is the difference between scientific objectivity
and objectivity for the everyday judges? He answers that by saying that the difference is that the
scientist is more inclined, more habituated in his terms, to reexamining his or her objectivities
than our ordinary persons who are less likely to question themselves and less likely to reexamine
things. If you look at the bottom of 124, four lines from the bottom, not that the scientist
does not judge at all before having such a having of the affairs themselves, the objectivities
themselves that belong to this particular category level. But he takes all prior judgments as only
provisional. The categorical objectivities accepted in them as only provisionally accepted
as merely supposed objectivities. So there's a willingness to surrender
what's become habitual among scientists, a greater willingness to surrender your affiliation
compared with people in everyday life. Now Schultz added another one in his writings
in terms of the difference between common sense thinkers and scientific thinkers. He says that
the scientists systematically expose their thinking to criticism of other people. That's not
that they're thinking any differently. I mean he agrees with Schultz to that extent that they're
using the same processes but they're more open to this kind of negative criticism and that's
part of the process. You know what they say isn't true but you have peer review and you have a
consensus and debate and dialectics and at the end of that you have something you don't have in
everyday life. But the structuring of the prejudgements is similar. You might try to
employ this taking as only provisional, this endless suspicion of yourself as a constant practice.
And if you do, it's for sure you won't be invited to the parties that they have at the
university. You know those sociologists. I mean we're constantly questioning authority. We have
a bumper sticker in Eugene, question authority. Everybody likes to put that in their car, question
authority. But the people who put that in their car are questioning other people's authority.
Schultz was talking about questioning your own authority. That's really more helpful.
And that's the good coffee. That's why I love the coffee thing. They do that a lot because they have
to do that because their cards, their descriptors are hemming them in at every stage while every cup
of coffee they taste is breaking them out causing them to move through them and transcend them.
So the crisis in science that Husserl speaks of is when scientists fail to live up to this constant
self-criticism or what Husserl calls in this text radical self-understanding. Radical self-understanding
it's a great notion and I think even a great term. Radical self-understanding
is understanding that is bifocal. It's looking at the object and trying to nail down you know
what geological formation is. But as it's doing, as Hoppe demonstrated to us the
astronomers have to do as part of their trade, you have to look at yourself looking.
You have to have this reflexive gaze. You have to see yourself seeing. Radical self-understanding
is understanding that it's understanding while it's always re-examining its roots.
So you're constantly in Husserlian terms which is very criticized by the postmodernist
purifying your consciousness meaning that you're you're fessing up to your biases. You're realizing
that this coffee is round because you're using the term round. So you're trying to constantly
check up on yourself to make sure that you're not eating yourself down a rosy trail.
And then he says this is a peculiar judging procedure in 125. He's right in the middle of
the page in 125. This brings about a peculiar judging procedure on the scientist part in italics.
A zigzag judging. Okay that is that is you're going to the object and then you're going to the
mind and then you're going back to the object and you're going to the mind. First making
straight for the giveness of something itself but then going back critically to the provisional
results already obtained whereupon his criticism must also be subjected to criticism. So it's almost
an endless criticism of the critique of of the acceptance and you know that is an endless
regress and how you go at the end of his life wrote some very cogent articles on that but
but you have to you have to do that we can't do any better that's that's the cards that have been
given to us. Note also on this page Heschel's profound realization of the limits of science.
He says at the end of that same paragraph in parentheses when he talks about true getting
the true being he says an idea incidentally the sense and limits of which are not matters for
positive science itself to explore that is the the whole process of this criticism and radical
self-understanding positive science hasn't really appreciated and maybe it's not even in its in its
bag of responsibilities although it should be the crisis is that they don't so he he defines
science as cognizing that accepts no judgments as scientific except those that have shown their
correctness and that's that's I think a very important thing where does truth originate
does it originate in method or does it originate in what Heschel called evidence in German which
means immediate insight in this correctness that he puts in quotes because it's hard to put a word
but I know something is true because I have that experience I taste that roundness and that roundness
is so true that that's where I start that's that and if anybody says something else I'll deny
you know I mean like my experience in my life is there's no such thing as reincarnation
and so I'm living with all these people who presume I believe in it and I and I get into a lot
of trouble and even satirized by my teachers for being cynical about it but I'm not about to believe
anything that I don't know is certain right so that's that's the kind of faith that that Heschel
is calling science and it's uh it's uh you know it's it's it's an important way way to work okay
so we'll we'll take a break and we'll come back and do the the crisis of the European Sciences
okay we're gonna pick up with what I believe is the the most beautiful passage of phenomenological
prose ever written so beautiful I felt that too
which passage one I would even call it poetry uh it's on page 56
under K the section is fundamental significance of the problem of the origin of mathematical
natural science okay it's uh starts on line five the second sentence
well that's important it's it's kind I it's so beautiful I want you to come in right when it
can grab you it's like when you're when you're studying a tape uh one of the great thing about
the digitizing of the tapes is you can bounce right on the exact start of the data that you're
looking for if you have in the old days when you had to rewind oh I remember there was something
great that he just said that relates to this after you spent 10 minutes looking for it and then
losing your place whether you're before it or after it the enthusiasm of your mind is gone
and so you can't attend to it so I want it's so good I want your enthusiasm to be to be eager
and ready okay fifth line the developed method the developed method the progressive fulfillment
of the task is as method and art which is handed down but its true meaning is not necessarily
handed down with it and it is precisely for this reason that a theoretical task and achievement
like that of a natural science or any science of the world which can master the infinity of
its subject matter only through infinities of method and can master the latter infinities only
by means of a technical thought and activity which are empty of meaning can only be and remain meaningful
in a true and original sense if the scientist has developed in himself the ability to inquire back
into the original meaning of all his meaning structures and methods that is into the historical
meaning of their primal establishment and especially into the meaning of all their inherited
meanings taken over unnoticed in this primal establishment as well as those taken over later
on okay that's just wonderful it's talking about the way that science proceeds by necessarily by
relying on method but how the method eventually becomes empty of meaning I mean I got him was
talking about that in truth and method you need the method but the method is not where truth lies
right it's not where the real objectivity is and you can't convince people in the coffee world
who've invested hundreds of thousands of dollars in these methods you can't convince them that
that's not where certainty and truth are and they're suspicious of of of something subjective but
okay using coffee tasting as an example if it involves your tongue it's got to be subjective
and so to pretend that it's not is to not be objective if there's a subjective component
in reaching the objectivity of the taste then you have to admit that subjective component
they get that a bk coffee that's why I was so enthused two days ago they understand that and
they're not denying that and they still develop their technique they still develop their method
because you have to have a method and the method becomes a technique and you master the infinity
of its subject matter all the flavors of coffee only through the infinities of method and you become
technically expertise at doing that but it can only remain meaningful if you inquire back into
how you develop those methods in the first place what were you finding what were you witnessing
I mean he's describing the fate of all objectivities here and the fate of all objectivities is to
become thinner and thinner in meaning to less and less of that original awareness certainly not
the horizon of meaning in which the the method was developed you know coffee tasters realized
they needed to keep track and it was good to keep track in this way and then you come up with
different ways some forms do it from one to ten some forms do it from they have a form a couple
of excellence where i'm going uh next week in El Salvador they do uh zero four six and eight
zero four six and eight it's not it's not equal and that that changes the results the uh the
specialty coffees of Italy they do one to seven so you get a lot of fours and fives okay hard to
get a lot of fours and fives on a form that's zero four six and eight right but anyway you develop
you develop your method for for whatever good reason that you have but you forget what the good
reason is and then you just do it by rote and when you do it by rote you're not going to do it as
well that's who shows notion he's saying that that the the the mathematical natural scientists
have to go back into the historical meanings and capture what did you inherit you know when you read
the the textbook in mathematics in in grammar school and high school and college uh what were
the inherited meanings and then what what were and a lot of those meanings you didn't even notice
you kind of like they were like subliminal and you maybe discovered them later even um
um and then there's things that you take over later on accretions as as mathematical science
develops as your career develops as you do your research here there in this other areas you pick
up things there's a there's a development and so part of the concern of phenomenology is to not
just take things as static but to go back and find the originary sense originary that's another word
that that microsoft will well not a lot right uh but it's a technical who's showing term and it's
a term that's very much under criticism and we won't go into that here but the postmodernists
say there's no such thing as original derrida says everything is derivative and he's right but
pusher only means there's a point at which you first put the idea together given a natural
experience that actual experience exists you can go back that far you know there's not they're not
original in the sense of that of a need so you want to keep aware then of the synthetic activities
of producing these unities of sense and not and not just accept the unities of sense as docile
cultural objects so again there's seeing and then then in categorically informed seeing is seeing
that that that captures the process of cat categorizing and synthesizing um i mean it seems
like it's impossible because there's no piercing seeing already involves all that
on of course i won't talk about this there's a kind of seeing in the Tibetan system that they say
is direct and unmediated but i think that's mythology but i'm not sure anyway i'm i'm
planning on investigating it in the next couple of years but it's part of this debate i'm not
forcing crucial onto them so uh he's acknowledging again here on page 56 the limits of positive
science when he says the mathematician the natural scientist at best a highly brilliant
technician of the method i mean that's a respectful put down right a highly brilliant
technician of the method and hushall was a mathematician i mean he had no reason to dislike
mathematicians but he wanted to basically find to ground truth and certainties as a mathematician
and he wasn't able to do it and it fascinated him so he began to become a philosopher to explore
why that wasn't possible i'm 57 uh in the middle of that paragraph that's over there
he says every attempt to lead the scientist to such reflections if it comes from a mathematical
non scientific circle of scholars is rejected as metaphysical okay this is what we would call
an australia a winch he's winching he's complaining that that that oh this criticism is is is
uh we're not doing metaphysics that they put down people doing that and it's going on this very
minute as i speak there's a movement at the university of fryberg to remove the chair
that hushall and heidegger occupy that gunty figal presently occupies they want to remove it and
replace it with an analytic philosopher and so the whole world is screaming and i don't know
what the politics are on that campus but it shows you that i mean i mean hushall was there at fryberg
when he was writing this sentence and uh things have only gotten worse right so uh it's it's not
like there's a happy ending yet well it's changing the academic style and uh power play it's pure
mega trend of analytic philosophers eradicating everybody else yeah they did that in holland
completely there's nobody doing anything non-agletical in language for example well there's
there's a hardy department there's the center for the study of subjectivity at the university of
Copenhagen yeah i talked about holland oh holland right sorry but i mean then certain areas i mean
we can see that they just burn and escape and they do in germany at the moment so and they will do it here
maybe and so his argument is that if positive scientists in no way inquired into the unexamined
taken for granted received method then then there won't be this difference between science and
and naive everyday practitioner i mean what distinguishes science is this capacity to
turn the gaze back on itself this is what science is uh
but it takes longer to do it stalls you you can't move forward as quickly okay let's let's uh
uh look at uh
i forget
okay
um on the next page um
um
which is 105 pages later um let's look at uh at 163 oh
he was a mathematician yeah one two seventeen sorry joke
um
here he says um let's see well i want to read a couple of sections here um
i just have to find them
okay uh let's start with the middle paragraph on 163 but instead of inquiring further in the sphere
of our own intuition so let's turn our attention to the fact that in our continuously flowing world
proceeding now that continuously is very big news right and he uses that continuously also at line
three of 164 that continuously is uh is the ongoing character of events it's the no time out
it's the uh the the floating crab game that garfinkel's talking about um that is you don't
want to reduce affairs to some kind of static sociology which is what most positive sociologists
do so uh in our continuously flowing world proceeding we are not isolated but rather have
within a contact with other human beings right it's a very frank uh attention to social phenomena
each one has his perceptions his presentations his harmonious experiences the valuation of
his certainties into mere possibilities right plenty of those doubts questions illusions
but in living with one another each one can take part in the life of the others
thus in general the world exists not only for isolated men but for the community of men
and this is due to the fact that even what is straightforwardly perceptual is communalized
in this communalization too there constantly occurs an alteration of validity through reciprocal
correction in reciprocal understanding and i think he gets this reciprocal from simul because
simul talked about uh reciprocal stimulation as the core interest of sociology uh looking at
the sociality uh in reciprocal understanding my experiences and experiential acquisitions
enter into contact with those of others so this this reciprocal correction reciprocal
understanding is a very general gloss but what is it a gloss for we still have to fully explore
this that's what we're doing i think in ethno methodology there's this kind of these meanings
these unities of meanings that are produced and stabilized fall apart in this reciprocal
so they're so we have to kind of correct them uh and the validity's get altered a little bit
and they get restabilized and so my hope is i can record enough coffee tasters to see how
they're stabilizing those unities of meaning when they come apart because the coffees are
going to throw them apart i mean coffees do i mean it was amazing two days ago there was one
coffee that was totally smooth i would say like like a base and then there was the next coffee
was like a tenor just singing high flavored fruity notes i mean there were like six coffees on the
table four completely different flavors you wouldn't you think they were different different
plants um so so there's always a point at which the categories are going to fall short
you can pin them in the categories but you want to preserve what is unique about that coffee that
you're thinking of paying big bucks for i mean one of them was a very expensive coffee that in fact
he loved it but he felt he wouldn't be able to afford it because they can't be putting
super expensive coffee because they produce so much of it that it's going to be super expensive to buy
that much right and and then once they put it in they have to commit to paying that for the long
run so they also have to think about what it's going to cost later in years to come or else
their clients will get pissed off being hooked on that flavor i mean that's a different seminar
but anyway but we're talking about reciprocal correction i mean they're trying to re-establish
the the efficacy and and vitality of these categorical uh unities that they're producing
and it's there's no time out i mean it's the world is always going to fall apart and come back
together and then later in that paragraph we won't read it all talking about intersubjective
harmony of validity and intersubjective unity so you get this intersubjectivity which you know okay
this i would say all of us ethnomethodologists garfinkel included we're thrilled with this
notion of intersubjectivity he had the anniversary of his life although he always talked about
intersubjectivity from the very beginning but he makes a bigger deal a bit later and we're all
interested but at the end we realize it's just a it's just a gloss that intersubjective kind of
like says everybody stands alone and then they come together but it's not like that they're together
first and so i i i'm i'm not happy with the with using the term intersubjective um but still
the phenomena the the real world experience that intersubjective unity is is an intersubjective
discrepancies is addressing those real world phenomena are what we're studying we just have to
find more appropriate uh ways of describing okay so so you get this this social term in uh in
the crisis of the european sciences which came at the end of his life and he couldn't avoid the
social because by that time he'd been kicked out of his job at fryberg because the nazis took over
and he was jewish and uh and you couldn't deny the social importance of social affairs and the
the origin of geometry took what wrote uh was was delivered i think in chakrasilakia
in prog um uh and uh i think it was maybe a year before he died two years before he died
when he was practically he couldn't go lecture in germany um and uh derrida wrote his
doctoral dissertation on the origin of geometry um and he's written a lot about it this is kind of
kind of interesting very clear derrida you don't get a lot of it that i mean derrida i i mean i i
like him very much but uh but his earlier material his book on on the origin of geometry is is one
of his clearest um the uh it's a it's a it's not a really long article and and garfinkel has a paper
on this in human studies i don't know 2005 maybe i'm not sure or yeah i maybe could be earlier
um and you know he recognized well that all scientific constructions are
products of the cultural world um and he asks mostly how these scientific products get to
be objective so he asks in a very radical way uh and you you see that uh in the bottom of 357
in the footnote okay um he says are more precisely in the line three four they have their objectivity
their existence for everyone uh so is that what objectivity is how they exist for everybody
in a kind of similar way um he says uh above the page about a third of the way down the sensible
utterances on 357 still have spatiotemporal individuation in the world like all corporeal
occurrences that he's talking about indexicality there indexical expressions have a corporeal
nature to them they're they're the the term the utterances the words are like bodies because they
have a sound uh they're they're tangible but tangible has to do with touch i don't know if
there's a similar word for sound but but they're there in the world and they can become a focal
point for a lot of times when you we do our studies this came out particularly when i was
looking at intercultural conversations uh there were many situations in which persons like chinese
visiting the us they knew that something was very important in the conversation a passage
they kept getting repeated with a certain energy but they didn't know what it meant but they knew
that that was the core of what they were supposed to understand so you know something without knowing
what it is so there's that corporeal nature and that provides then the focal point for the the
chinese and american participants in a conversation um so it's it's this observation i think
illustrates this process of objectivation that that this tangibility is produced by the objectivation
we need that in order so people can get on the same page even though they're not sure what's on
the page still the material facticity of a gloss or of an account or an utterance allows it to serve
as the vehicle for what gerbage calls in a fabulous phrase but in the end it's only a gloss that
doesn't yet mean enough intersubjective concatenation of meaning that is the the the way in which people
do this reciprocal uh correction this reciprocal interconcatenation uh the um which are all just
names but but you need some you need an object you need a place for people to come together you need
the corporeal character of the occurrence is what hostel's saying here
um i mean he gets really specific i think a little further down maybe it's in the main text not the
footnote it's three six nine lines from the bottom of the main larger text on page 357 he says
wherever something is asserted one can distinguish what is thematic that about which it is said
okay that about which it is said
uh but uh and sometimes that's all we have and i like to think of it as the an empty palette
that remains to be loaded and people will then start loading it uh like uh like like what is full
body what is medium body uh and people have the term they have this thematic object it's a gloss
for what garfinkel says it's a gloss for whatever comes to me he said the the uh he in his studies
of games with rules he says that that rules consist of their consequences right i mean that's not
how people i said the rules the rules of the rules they have to know what they are ahead of time
no it's not like that i mean it can be on rare occasions but it's not
so as social phenomenologists we want to track the local history of that production
and uh you know the the temporality that pushover wrote a lot about is in fact the temporality that
that we're trying to capture in our studies of of naturally occurring interaction
so he poses a fabulous question at the bottom of 357
how does geometrical ideality just like that of all sciences proceed from its primary
intrapersonal that is one person alone origin where it is a structure within the conscious space
of the first inventor's soul to its ideal objectivity ideal referring to the uh the
the self-identical meaning unity that is shared by everybody in the group uh so that's the way
hosso poses the question and you know for me the first inventor's soul is a step too far uh
i mean i don't know about souls and i don't know about lone inventors um
i want to reverse that and my argument which which i don't think i haven't convinced i haven't
gotten sahabi to listen to the argument yet uh because every time i make it he says yeah
but he doesn't know that if he's saying that if he's always asking how do we get from the
individual's inventor soul to to the inter subjective i want to know how do we get from
the inter subjective to the individual i'm reversing that um and i think we need to do a lot of that
um i mean it can be the story the way hosso phrases it it's possible to proceed from one
creative idea to its objectivation and so move from the subjective to the inter subjective
but i don't think that's usually how it happens i think it's only an ideal version and not the
real version uh because what we have is always already there uh and how did it get there how
does this receive stuff that we passively the whole passive synthesis of glycerol i think
i don't know enough i i have to spend a good year uh reading through those texts um that passive
synthesis is full of insight and then in the end maybe as a cop out i don't know uh uh but but i
i want to to look at more i mean with either way we do work now with with our attention to local
detail with the assistance of digital recordings i mean i think we can really discover these things
from the real world as hosso and garfinkel are both recommending uh and you could say oh yeah it's
both you know you know it can happen one way it can happen the other way uh or you could say
a lot is that oh yeah there's some kind of dialectics at work which is it's too vague
to be really helpful and usually when philosophers say it they're secretly keeping the subjective
this primary this cartesian subject somehow won't die um if there's going to be any original and
if not uh it would be what hosso is here calling the inner subject he says i'm one on three five
three fifty eight uh about two thirds of the way down a reciprocal getting along with others
okay i mean this that's that's i mean you couldn't say at the methodology is a study of the reciprocal
getting along with others i mean that's that would be adequate uh but maybe it doesn't approach the
radical character of what we've come upon um on the next page line three three fifty nine he says uh
in this sense civilization is for every man who's we horizon it is a community of those
who can reciprocally express themselves so this reciprocal which i'm maintaining he gets from
simil because uh it's in simil and he was reading simil's books and there's all these books by simil
well doggiered in uh was early in library in living um
that um that this this reciprocal expressing is is uh is i think uh important
uh i mean that's a reference i think uh although not blatant to the what hosso would call
originary character of inner subjective life um and also on the next page three sixty he comes
up with this term co-accomplishment in the middle of the page a co-accomplishment what kind there's
no individual there the co is is of course you know a small syllable very vague and and in any case
there's not really accomplishing going because that retains the cartesian sense that we're in
control of everything but the the the lockian uh sense that that we're in charge uh we have to
depart the enlightenment and discover and that's what sociology really is is is realizing the sense
in which the the structure like of the turn taking uh is running the show a lot of the time it's it's
not it's not that uh that that i'm being dishonest when when uh when there's a misunderstanding and i
don't explain the misunderstanding it's that i just didn't get a chance to talk because the
conversation didn't provide me with a turn and then the person said well why didn't you correct me
you know they feel wounded right but it's it's these things kind of run themselves we're not in
charge of everything in the rational decision science way that comes out of the enlightenment
mom so anyway this co-accomplishment though uh is uh needs our the kind of specification
re-specification that we're able to give to it uh and we give to it following the methodological
the principal methodological rule of our soul which is not theories but the things themselves
so uh um he's moving in the in the direction that we want but um i'm not sure that that his
attempts to explain it is always helpful um he says uh just a little bit below on 360 uh the
productions below what below the co-accomplishment uh the productions can reproduce their likenesses
from person to person well i don't know if that's how it happens reproduce it as though they exist
before and then the chain of the understanding of these repetitions what is self-evident turns
up as the same in the consciousness of the other uh that's that's a first attempt okay but it's
hardly the situation in the unity of the community of communication among several persons the repeatedly
produced structure becomes an object of consciousness not as a likeness but as the one structure
common to all well all by that it does become that the question is how does it become the one
structure common to all this is social work this is sociality this is the term that symbol
use this is what we what people are doing all the time is somehow get the one structure in common
that's why when i go to london i get scolded when i'm waiting in the bus line i mean i'm not budding
in but i'm just not participating in making this one structure common to all right so uh so this is
worth that people do and they do it in different ways in different places um so uh and that structure
come to all it's also dirt climbing um who shall ask how does the geometry he says the
primarily establishing geom geometry uh i'm not sure that that's adequate uh how does the
geometry express transform his internal structure in its ideality into something objective that's
that's really what we're interested in or he says on 159 how does the oh yeah i i read now um
then then he says uh back on 356 toward the bottom
and i wrote that out because i was at home and my my scanners was dying and i was desperate
um the uh he says the original where is that the original being itself there um
an original self evidence i'm not sure
oh no is it sorry it's on it's on 359
so i have a mistake in my notes
uh toward the bottom uh the original being itself there in the immediate
sea of its first production that is in original self evidence that's a very big term that's
where we're truth is things we really know for sure that we experience results in no
persisting acquisition at all that could have objective existence that is the original moment
when i have an insight when i'm tasting that coffee and i capture that flavor and i have no idea
how to describe it it's like it's like let's say a basket of fruit you know what do i what
how do i make this a persisting acquisition that that can lead to a lot of people communicating
about uh this is is such an important question that's our goal is to make our insights persisting
acquisitions that's why we need to objectivate them that's why we develop accounts and formulations
that persisting acquisition is everybody's daily work what hustle describes does happen pretty
much along the ways that he describes um but these objectivities are maybe already there uh
uh we they land in our lap passively as much as their active productions that we could go back
and do an archaeology of an excavation of and find out like what we were we're reading uh among
the the geometers and mathematicians uh that you can excavate and get where to start where
to go next where to go next we're already having these persisting acquisitions and that they persist
is recommends that we keep them that we that we retain them we might not even know what round
means to describe coffee but everybody's using the term so it's not going away so i might as well
understand what it means so we we need these acquisitions because they're part of the of the
of the palette it's not an empty palette they're a palette filled they're filled with this term
round and with different kind of senses so now how do we coordinate and reciprocally bring these
understandings into some kind of uh of of unity and if you look on 361 you might then be able to
understand this wonderful passage on this paragraph just below the middle on 361
and uh we might even end with this there is a distinction then between passively understanding
the expression and making itself evident by reactivating its meaning
but there are also exist possibilities of a kind of activity a thinking in terms of things
that have been taken up merely receptively passively which deals with significations only
passively understood and taken over without any of the self evidence of original activity
that's what i find amazing and why i included that in your reading is that's the point i'm trying
to make i mean husho often sees the flaw in his thinking he sees the most original solutions to
the problems and he even begins to describe them as he does here but then when he goes back to
recapping the general theory he seems to like like forget about them because it's too hard
and too indeterminate to uh to describe that but my critique that i just gave you
three minutes ago is in this passage you know maybe without any of the self evidence of original
activity so i'm amazed that uh that husho is just incredibly deep and so all i wanted to do today
was to convey to you and to people in ethno methodology that husho's deep okay and this
i'll leave it to you to reactivate and re-specify but that deepness is uh if you can use it if you
can't use it you know i'm not going to insist on it but um i'm i would say by way of concluding that
that one of my earliest professors peter berger would be very proud of me right now